# TetO-shTPH2_rats

Code and data for the article: Poor Decision Making and Sociability Impairment following Central Serotonin Reduction in Inducible TPH2-Knockdown Rats

Article: Alonso L, Peeva P, Fernández-del Valle Alquicira T, Erdelyi N, Gil Nolskog Á, Bader M, Winter Y, Alenina N, Rivalan M. 2024. Poor Decision Making and Sociability Impairment Following Central Serotonin Reduction in Inducible TPH2-Knockdown Rats. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 25:5003. doi:10.3390/ijms25095003
https://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/25/9/5003

Abstract: Serotonin is an essential neuromodulator for mental health and animals’ socio-cognitive abilities. However, we previously found that a constitutive depletion of central serotonin did not impair rat cognitive abilities in stand-alone tests. Here, we investigated how a mild and acute decrease in brain serotonin would affect rats’ cognitive abilities. Using a novel rat model of inducible serotonin depletion via the genetic knockdown of tryptophan hydroxylase 2 (TPH2), we achieved a 20% decrease in serotonin levels in the hypothalamus after three weeks of non-invasive oral doxycycline administration. Decision making, cognitive flexibility, and social recognition memory were tested in low-serotonin (Tph2-kd) and control rats. Our results showed that the Tph2-kd rats were more prone to choose disadvantageously in the long term (poor decision making) in the Rat Gambling Task and that only the low-serotonin poor decision makers were more sensitive to probabilistic discounting and had poorer social recognition memory than other low-serotonin and control individuals. Flexibility was unaffected by the acute brain serotonin reduction. Poor social recognition memory was the most central characteristic of the behavioral network of low-serotonin poor decision makers, suggesting a key role of social recognition in the expression of their profile. The acute decrease in brain serotonin appeared to specifically amplify the cognitive impairments of the subgroup of individuals also identified as poor decision makers in the population. This study highlights the great opportunity the Tph2-kd rat model offers to study inter-individual susceptibilities to develop cognitive impairment following mild variations of brain serotonin in otherwise healthy individuals. These transgenic and differential approaches together could be critical for the identification of translational markers and vulnerabilities in the development of mental disorders.

Preprint: Alonso L, Peeva P, Fernandez del valle Alquicira T, Erdelyi N, Gil-Nolskog A, Bader M, Winter Y, Alenina N, Rivalan M. 2024. Poor decision making and sociability impairment following central serotonin reduction in inducible TPH2-knockdown rats | bioRxiv. doi:10.1101/2024.01.06.574479
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.01.06.574479v1
